---
layout: single
title: "[Literature] Points of Disparity"
categories: learn
toc: true
---



# Points of (Dis)parity: Expectation Disconfirmation from Common Attributes in Consumer Choice

Citation (APA):  Evangelidis, I., & Van Osselaer, S. M. J. (2018). Points of (Dis)parity: Expectation Disconfirmation from Common Attributes in Consumer Choice. Journal of Marketing Research, 55(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.15.0233



같이 읽어보기 좋은 글: [만족은 기대의 결과물이다. (brunch.co.kr)](https://brunch.co.kr/@yuntae/79)



## Abstract

Whereas many theories of decision making predict that presenting or not presenting common features of **choice alternatives should not affect choice**, in this research, the authors show that **common features can be a powerful driver of choice behavior**. They conjecture that consumers often hold expectations about the features that choice alternatives have in common, and they demonstrate that presenting (vs. omitting information about) a common feature increases the choice probability of the alternative that would have been expected to perform worse on the common feature, given its performance on differentiating features. This effect occurs because performance on the common feature is judged not at face value but relative to an expectation about which product should perform best on that feature. The effect holds even though performance on the common feature is clearly the same when alternatives are presented side by side. Finally, the authors demonstrate four boundary conditions of this effect.

#### Keywords

[common features](https://journals.sagepub.com/keyword/Common+Features), [common attributes](https://journals.sagepub.com/keyword/Common+Attributes), [nondifferentiating attributes](https://journals.sagepub.com/keyword/Nondifferentiating+Attributes), [points of parity](https://journals.sagepub.com/keyword/Points+Of+Parity), [context effects](https://journals.sagepub.com/keyword/Context+Effects)



## Introduction

Products in a consumer's choice set often have one or more features in common. For example, while #2 pencils differ in price and brand, they are all made of lead-free graphite. A set of laptops may be different on several dimensions but share the same graphics coprocessor. Two versions of a Toyota Sienna minivan differ on 91 attributes but share many others. Marketers have considerable discretion whether, and how prominently, to display common features. For example, on Amazon. com, most pencils are not advertised as lead-free, but on the same website, clicking on an ASUS laptop brings up a comparison table that does include a row that indicates that all the laptops in the table have the same graphics coprocessor. Whereas Honda USA's website for the Odyssey minivan prominently displays only the features that are added with each consecutive trim level, relegating common features to the next level down in the page hierarchy, Toyota USA's website for the Sienna minivan never presents only the unique features but directly guides consumers to a comparison tool that lists many common features.

According to many theories of decision making, the choices consumers make should not depend on whether or how prominently information is provided about common attributes. For instance, according to multiattribute utility models (using a standard, main-effect specification; e.g., [Bettman, Capon, and Lutz 1975](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)a, b; [Meyer 1981](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); Van Osselaer and Janiszewski 2012), the utilities of options change when a common attribute is introduced, but the absolute differences do not. Thus, if choice is based on absolute differences in utility, adding a common attribute should have no effect on choice. The same zero-effect prediction is made by the standard multinomial logit model of choice ([Guadagni and Little 1983](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Luce 1959](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Similarly, prominent noncompensatory models, such as the “elimination by aspects” model ([Tversky 1972](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) and the lexicographic model ([Fishburn 1974](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)), assert that attributes along which alternatives score the same do not serve as the criterion for choice. Thus, marketers' decisions about whether to (prominently) display common features may seem unimportant. Research in marketing, however, suggests that common features can impact decisions ([Chernev 1997](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#), [2001](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Malaviya and Sternthal 2009](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)).

In this article, **we argue that earlier research has ignored the role of consumers' *expectations* when examining the effect of common attributes.** We propose that, before choosing, consumers evaluate an alternative's performance on a common attribute not only based on its face value (i.e., stated performance) but also based on expectations about the choice alternatives' relative performance on that attribute, formed on the basis of other differentiating attributes. Deviation from that expected relative performance then increases preference for the alternative that performs better than expected on the common attribute, at the expense of the alternative that performs worse than expected. This happens even though it should be abundantly clear to consumers that the two products are identical on this attribute, which therefore should not differentiate the products. That is, there is no need for inferences about the common attribute because information on that attribute is not missing. Nevertheless, consumers evaluate products depending on post hoc expectations about relative performance (i.e., on “which of the options I would have expected to do better than the other[s]”). Thus, we argue that presenting (vs. omitting information about) a common feature can systematically impact preference for an option contingent on a consumer's expectations about how that alternative should perform on the common attribute, and further on the extent to which those expectations are confirmed or disconfirmed. Our research suggests that brand positioning on a common attribute can help marketers boost the sales of products that consumers expect to perform worse than the competition on the common attribute. For instance, sales of a cheaper laptop may go up when the laptop is shown to have the same graphics coprocessor as some more expensive alternatives. Conversely, omitting information about a common attribute may be preferred by marketers promoting higher-priced products or premium brands, which consumers often expect to perform better than cheaper alternatives on dimensions related to quality.



## An Expectation-Based Account of the Effect of Common Attributes

First, imagine that a consumer is making a choice between two camera brands, A and B, where brand A has more optical zoom than B but is more expensive. To make a decision, the consumer needs to consider the importance of optical zoom and price as well as the levels of optical zoom and price (e.g., [Evangelidis and Levav 2013](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic 1988](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)).

Second, imagine that a different consumer considers purchasing one of the same two cameras. However, that particular consumer has more information available: the knowledge that both options have the same video capture resolution. In this research, we argue that having information about a common attribute—in this example, video resolution—can influence choice depending on the consumer's expectations. Specifically, we hypothesize that the consumer may consider which of the alternatives (s)he would have expected to perform better than the other(s) on the common attribute based on the alternatives' performance on the differentiating attributes. Furthermore, we propose that the alternative that the consumer would have expected to perform better on the common attribute becomes relatively less attractive (i.e., is chosen less) when the consumer is exposed to information showing that actual performance on the common attribute is the same across the alternatives. Our proposition is based on findings from two research streams.

### Consumer Expectations about Relative Performance

Decision-making theory suggests that consumers often hold expectations about an alternative's performance on an attribute based on its performance on a different attribute that they see as correlated. For example, when consumers do not possess knowledge about a brand's quality but they do know its price, they may rely on perceptions about the relationship between price and quality to make an inference about quality (see [Dick, Chakravarti, and Biehal 1990](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Ford and Smith 1987](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Consumers may also perceive that one quality dimension is more strongly correlated with price than another quality attribute is. For instance, in cameras, video resolution may be more strongly correlated with price than battery life is. Overall, these expectations have been labeled probabilistic consistency inferences ([Dick et al. 1990](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)), and they should be active especially when the target attribute (e.g., video resolution) is brought to consumers' attention (e.g., by explicitly listing video resolution as unknown). Therefore, in our example, to the extent that the consumer perceives video resolution to be positively correlated with price and to the extent that video resolution is made salient (i.e., by stating that both brands have identical video resolution), probabilistic consistency suggests that (s)he is likely to expect that the expensive brand should have had better video resolution than the competitor.

### Dis-confirmation of Consumers' Expectations

In this article, we propose that the relative attractiveness of the two alternatives may change when it is stated that they have the same video resolution because consumers' expectations are disconfirmed. Marketing theory on expectancy disconfirmation suggests that there are two types of disconfirmation: positive and negative ([Oliver 1980](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). In the previous example, the more expensive alternative (brand A) performs worse than expected (negative disconfirmation) when information about the common attribute of video resolution is presented. Consumers would expect brand A to have better rather than similar video resolution relative to brand B. In contrast, brand B performs better than expected (positive disconfirmation) when information about the common attribute is presented. Consumers would expect brand B to have worse rather than similar video resolution relative to brand A. Positive (negative) disconfirmation has been shown to be a positive (negative) predictor of postpurchase satisfaction ([Bearden and Teel 1983](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Oliver 1980](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)).

In the present research, we hypothesize that (1) attribute-level expectations play a role in decision making not only when information about an attribute is explicitly missing ([Broniarczyk and Alba 1994](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Dick et al. 1990](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Gunasti and Ross 2009](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) but also when information about that attribute is present and clearly the same across alternatives; and (2) expectancy disconfirmation may have an effect on choice beyond postpurchase product satisfaction judgments (cf. [Bolton and Drew 1991](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Mittal, Kumar, and Tsiros 1999](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Oliver 1980](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). That is, we expect that expectancy disconfirmation operates not only at the level of the product, comparing prepurchase expectation of overall consumption enjoyment with postpurchase overall consumption enjoyment, but also at the level of an individual attribute and involving only prepurchase evaluation. Even before choosing, before purchase and consumption, the disconfirming information about the common attribute decreases the attractiveness of the product that was expected to do better on this attribute relative to the alternative.

In addition, we expect that this evaluation process based on the comparison between expected and actual relative performance on a common attribute occurs despite the presence of a salient, readily available point of comparison of the attribute level in one product to the level of the same attribute in the other product, which should clearly tell consumers that performance on that attribute is the same across options. Thus, whereas our hypothesis may hold theoretical and intuitive appeal, it is far from obvious when one thinks about it, because it is not obvious that consumers would base purchase decisions on their expectations about an attribute whose level is presented to them as being the same across alternatives. In sum, we argue:

H1: Providing (vs. omitting) information about a common attribute increases preference for the alternative that performs better than expected on the common attribute relative to the alternative that performs worse than expected on the common attribute.

### Theoretical Assumptions and Boundary Conditions

Our main proposition is that an alternative that would be expected to perform worse relative to the competitor on the common attribute will be preferred more when information about the common attribute is added to the decision problem. In expectation disconfirmation research, expectations are typically defined as beliefs or predictions about a focal brand's having specific levels of desired attributes rather than a focal brand performing better than the competition (e.g., [Oliver 1980](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). However, we hypothesize that consumers' attribute-level expectations are often relative rather than absolute. That is, consumers often simply expect one alternative to perform better or worse than another without having a specific attribute value in mind. We draw this prediction from findings in decision-making research suggesting that valuations of an amount, quantity, or attribute value are more sensitive to the amount's relative position within a range of values than to the range (or amount) under consideration ([Ariely, Loewenstein, and Prelec 2003](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Frederick and Fischoff 1998](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Similarly, evaluability theory ([Hsee 1996](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Hsee and Zhang 2010](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Hsee et al. 1999](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) posits that it is difficult for consumers to gauge the desirability of a particular attribute value when they have information about one value in isolation. However, when a value is evaluated in the context of another, as in joint evaluation or choice, they can use one attribute value as reference when evaluating the other. These findings inspire our prediction that, as with valuations, consumers should be more likely to formulate (imprecise) expectations about an alternative performing better or worse than another without having specific attribute values in mind. Therefore, consumers will find it harder to assess whether observed values are in line with their expectations when they evaluate one alternative in isolation rather than both alternatives at the same time. We thus predict:

H2: An increase in preference for an alternative that was expected to perform worse on the common attribute is more pronounced when consumers evaluate all alternatives together (joint evaluation) rather than separately (single evaluation).

Note that our second hypothesis has meaningful implications for customer satisfaction and marketing strategy literature theorizing that (postpurchase) satisfaction is based on attribute-level evaluations (e.g., [Mittal et al. 1999](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Our prediction suggests that prepurchase attribute-level evaluations of a given attribute value can largely depend on the presence (vs. absence) of information about the competitor. Consumers may evaluate the same attribute value more positively contingent on information about an inferior competitor being readily available.

In addition, assuming that attribute-level expectations are formed in a relative manner, we contend that the direction of the effect of the additional attribute on choice should depend on the relative performance of the two options on that attribute. Our predicted effect should be observed only when an alternative disconfirms consumers' expectations about the option's relative performance on that attribute. Consumers' expectations are disconfirmed only when the alternative that was expected to perform worse on the additional attribute scores equal to or higher than the competitor on the additional attribute. Therefore:

H3: Preference for an alternative that was expected to perform worse on the common attribute depends on the extent to which actual performance on that attribute disconfirms relative expectations.

Furthermore, if our effect is indeed driven by expectations about differences in performance between the two alternatives on the common attribute, then the effect should be contingent on the presence, at the aggregate level of an experimental condition, of a clear expectation. If consumers do not expect that one alternative outperforms the other on the common attribute, then presenting (vs. omitting) the common attribute should not have an influence on choice. Thus:

H4: The effect of presenting a common attribute on preference depends on the extent to which, in the aggregate, consumers hold expectations about products' relative performance on that attribute.

Finally, we note that although consumers evaluate the common attribute according to its deviation from expected relative performance, the impact of the common attribute on decisions should still be based on the importance of the common attribute. This proposition merits attention because it suggests that managers need to assess and measure consumers' beliefs about the relative importance of the common attribute(s), as in the case of differentiating attributes ([Martilla and James 1977](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Common attributes that are relatively more important should be more likely to determine consumer choice and drive preference ([Myers and Alpert 1968](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Thus, doing better or worse than expected on a less important attribute should have less impact on choice than doing better or worse than expected on a more important attribute. Thus, we expect:

H5: The effect of the common attribute on choice is stronger when the common attribute is relatively important rather than unimportant.



## Overview

[Table 1](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#) and [Figure 1](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#) feature an overview of our seven studies and main findings. In Studies 1 and 2, we demonstrate the basic effect that displaying a common attribute decreases choice of the alternative that, given the other attribute(s), would be expected to perform better on the common attribute. Studies 3–7 provide process evidence. In Study 3, we test our basic proposition that consumers may perceive a difference in performance between two alternatives on an attribute even if actual scores are the same. In Study 4, we examine whether attribute-level expectations are formed with respect to a particular level on the common attribute (i.e., absolute expectations) or with respect to the relative performance between the alternatives (i.e., relative expectations). In Study 5, we provide additional evidence for our theoretical account by showing that the effect is moderated by the direction of expectancy disconfirmation. In Study 6, we provide further process evidence by showing that the extent to which consumers, as a group, expect a difference in relative performance on the common attribute moderates our result. Finally, in Study 7, we find that the importance of the common attribute moderates our effect. We conclude with a general discussion about theoretical and managerial implications.



------



## General Discussion

In this article, we investigate how introducing a common attribute influences choice through consumers' attribute expectations. Specifically, we propose that consumers evaluate an alternative's performance on a common attribute not only based on face value but also based on the deviation between actual and expected relative performance of the alternative on that attribute (even though the comparison with the competing alternative clearly indicates both alternatives' performance on the attribute are exactly the same). Therefore, alternatives that a consumer would have expected to perform worse relative to the competitor on the common attribute become more attractive when information about the common attribute is included. We find evidence that the effect is indeed driven by post hoc expectations in the common attribute condition about which option the consumer would have expected to do better than the other on the common attribute (Studies 3 and S1). We also demonstrate four boundary conditions of our effect: in separate (as opposed to joint) decision situations (Study 4), when participants' expectations are not disconfirmed (Study 5), when participants have no strong expectations about the common attribute (Study 6), and when the common attribute is not important (Study 7).

### Theoretical Contribution

Our research is not the first to document effects of common attributes on choice (e.g., [Chernev 1997](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#), [2001](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Malaviya and Sternthal 2009](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). For instance, prior research reports that the effect of common attributes on choice depends on the relative importance of the differentiating attributes ([Chernev 1997](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) and that the attractiveness of the common attribute also moderates the effect of adding a common attribute ([Chernev 2001](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). Our research contributes by introducing another effect of providing versus not providing information about common attributes. We advance an expectations-based account in which consumers evaluate an alternative's performance on a common attribute not only based on its stated performance but also based on expectations about the choice alternatives' relative performance on that attribute.

Beyond building on earlier work on common attributes by introducing a hitherto undocumented process by which common attributes can drive choice, our research speaks to three additional research streams within the (consumer) decision-making and marketing strategy literatures. First, our findings contribute to expectation-based models of consumer satisfaction (e.g., [Bearden and Teel 1983](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Bolton and Drew 1991](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Cadotte, Woodruff, and Jenkins 1987](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Churchill and Surprenant 1982](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Mittal et al. 1999](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Oliver 1980](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry 1985](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). These models posit that satisfaction with a product is driven by the comparison between the use experience and one's prior expectations. Consumers are (dis)satisfied when the use experience is better (worse) than what they expected before purchase. Our research shows that expectations affect choice beyond postpurchase product satisfaction judgments. We find that an expectancy disconfirmation mechanism also operates at the level of an individual attribute and in prepurchase evaluation. Consumers evaluate performance on an attribute based on the comparison between face values and expected relative performance; thus, expectancy disconfirmation can drive choice through other means besides (or rather, before) postpurchase satisfaction. This implies that expectancy disconfirmation, even in purely individual choice, may play an important role not just in repeat purchase decisions but also in trial decisions.

Second, our research contributes to context effect theory by adding to the evidence that choice is contingent not only on the composition of the choice set (e.g., [Evangelidis and Levav 2013](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Huber, Payne, and Puto 1982](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Simonson 1989](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Simonson and Tversky 1992](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Tversky 1972](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) but also on the composition of the attribute set. One might jokingly say that our results (as well as earlier research; [Chernev 1997](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) show violations not of independence of irrelevant alternatives but of independence of irrelevant attributes.

Third, our findings have implications for research on how consumers make inferences about attributes. Earlier research suggests that consumers may make inferences about an alternative's performance on an attribute for which attribute values are explicitly missing ([Broniarczyk and Alba 1994](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Dick et al. 1990](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#); [Johnson and Levin 1985](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)). In our research, we extend those findings and show that consumers may also make and use similar inferences when information about an attribute is readily available and clearly the same across alternatives.

### Practical Implications

Our research holds important implications for positioning strategy, product management, and retailing. Marketers have considerable discretion on whether they present or omit information on common attributes. We find many instances in which marketers decided to include (e.g., Amazon's table comparing ASUS Notebooks including information on the graphics processor) or omit (e.g., many manufacturers omitting information that their pencils contain lead-free graphite) information about common attributes. Our impression is that the inclusion versus omission decision is often not made in a systematic way. Our results indicate that including common attribute information would help sell products that consumers, based on information about other attributes, would expect to perform worse than competing products on the common attribute. Conversely, our results suggest that including common attribute information would hurt sales of products expected to perform better than competing products on the common attribute. We believe that expectations about common attributes would often be based on price and brand. Thus, marketers (including retailers) trying to sell higher-priced products and premium brands have an incentive to omit information about common attributes. The same would be true for marketers trying to push higher-priced products within a brand's portfolio of products. Similarly, with respect to brand positioning, our theory and data suggest that firms can build their brand positioning strategy around common attributes (or points of parity; see [Keller, Sternthal, and Tybout 2002](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1509/jmr.15.0233#)) along which they perform better than consumers would come to expect rather than only around points of differentiation on which they actually outperform other brands. Conversely, firms should refrain from positioning their brands around points of parity along which they perform worse than expected. Importantly, our research highlights the need to monitor and manage consumers' expectations about how a particular brand will perform relative to competition along different points of parity when developing a positioning strategy.

In our studies, we always vary whether the common attribute information is included versus omitted. Whereas we believe that information on many common attributes can be omitted completely (e.g., no car manufacturer notes that its cars have four wheels), marketers sometimes cannot completely omit information about common features. They can, however, make the common feature information less salient and separate that information from differentiating information. For example, one of us was shopping for a minivan and noted that Toyota USA's website for the Sienna (the “Original Swagger Wagon”) never presents only the unique features for the different trim levels but directly guides consumers to a comparison tool that lists many common features. It may not be desirable for Toyota to completely omit the common feature information from the website, but it would be feasible to separate the common feature information from the differentiating feature information and make the former less salient. To test whether our effect generalizes to this type of situation, we asked 403 MTurk participants (51% female, Mage = 34 years) to make a choice between two trims of the Toyota Sienna. The LE trim was cheaper, while the XLE trim was more expensive. The two trims were described along 132 attributes, of which 41 were differentiating and 91 were common. We randomly assigned participants to one of two experimental conditions. Participants in the common attributes salient condition were exposed to information about the two cars for all attributes (both differentiating and common) in a table format; we directly copied the content and layout from Toyota's brochure. For participants in the common attributes not salient condition, we segregated the differentiating from the common attributes. Participants were first exposed to the set of differentiating attributes and were then given the opportunity to click through to a list of common attributes (i.e., standard features). Therefore, the exact same information was available to participants in both conditions, while we manipulated whether all attributes were presented together or differentiating attributes were segregated and made salient. After reading our information, participants were asked to make a choice between the two cars at their actual prices: The LE trim at $31,640 and the XLE trim at $35,410. Consistent with our previous studies, we hypothesized and found that the expensive trim was chosen less frequently (38%) in the condition in which the common attributes were salient (i.e., presented together with the differentiating features) than when common attributes were segregated and not made salient (50%) (χ2 = 6.09, *p* = .014). This finding suggests that our effect replicates in a realistic and rather sophisticated choice problem with a very large set of attributes and manipulation of salience and segregation of common feature information rather than complete omission.
